right so notice that the title of this
video is should we put telescopes on
Mars not could we put telescopes on Mars
so this isn't about you know how we
build stuff on earth ship it to Mars
construct it there and communicate like
I'm assuming that that's all been sorted
right maybe humans have even already got
a settlement on Mars or something if
we've sorted all that out is it then a
good idea to put telescopes on Mars so
this question actually came from a
subscriber on Twitter so taha flutter on
twitter hi taha surprise by the way they
tweeted me to ask dear dr. Becky is
Mars's atmosphere suitable for a huge
land-based telescope if yes how
significantly better would it be
compared to earth-based telescopes and
do you envision when we settle on Mars
building telescopes even would be
considered right and I said good
question leave it with me so this leave
it with me is this video right now and I
love getting questions from people on
Twitter I think it's awesome like if you
have questions that you want to see me
answering videos then my handle is at
dr. Becky with an underscore tweet them
at me or leave them in the comments and
maybe I'll surprise you with the video
one day as well
so the key thing we have to consider
here is Martha's atmosphere so the
atmosphere on Earth is actually very
good at blocking lots of different
wavelengths on the full electromagnetic
spectrum so this is the full spectrum of
wavelengths of light Li you can get from
the longest wavelengths at radio waves
through the towards the UV and the
visible light that we actually see with
our own eyes at quite short wavelengths
and shorter even still - like x-ray and
gamma ray as well now there's a very
well known transmission spectrum from
Earth ie what wavelengths of light are
actually transmitted through the
atmosphere down to us on the surface and
when you see it you notice that most of
the wavelength of light shorter than
visible light so this is like UV x-ray
gamma ray none of that actually reaches
us at the surface which is a pretty good
thing for life because if you're
positive being bombarded by super
high-energy radiation from space it's
not necessarily a good thing and you'll
also notice that it gets a little bit
messy around about the infrared regime
which is
the wavelength slightly longer than
visible light where it lets through some
areas and not others we call these
transmission windows there's a window in
the atmosphere that lets us see that
wavelength of light in the infrared and
then you get up to higher wavelength
sort of into the microwave what we call
the submillimetre they're blocked again
until you get this really wide window in
the radio regime so we have lots of
radio telescopes on earth because we
radio waves penetrate Earth's atmosphere
and so we can see them from the ground
so the reason that Earth's transmission
spectrum has the shape is because of the
different components in the Earth's
atmosphere and so what wavelengths of
light are actually transmitted in that
spectrum all comes down to what elements
you've got in your atmosphere its
atmosphere is from like 78% nitrogen 21%
oxygen and there's no trace amounts of
carbon dioxide argon water vapor and all
of these things combine to give you that
spectra of what gets absorbed and what
gets transmitted because some of those
molecules when light hits them light at
the very right wavelength it likes to
absorb them and use them to get more
energetic molecules instead and do stuff
with it for example when the right kind
of wavelength of light hits oxygen it
causes it to what's called disassociate
so oxygen is o2 is two molecules of
oxygen bound together if a really high
AG particle comes in like a UV or an
x-ray particle hits that oxygen it
causes it to break apart and then each
of those things will then combine with
another molecule of o2 making oh three
which is ozone which is why we have a
really thick ozone layer around the
earth is because all those particles
come in from space they hit the top of
the Earth's atmosphere where there's a
lot of oxygen and you create this
boundary of o3 ozone Mars is atmosphere
though is very different to Earth's
so Mars's atmosphere is about 95% carbon
dioxide and then trace amounts of
nitrogen and argon again and then a
little bit of water vapor and a tiny
amount of oxygen so that's gonna give
you a different transmission spectrum
for all the light that's gonna reach the
Martian surface so that means we might
actually be able to do different
observations from Mars a surface that
we're not able to do from the ground on
earth and so I'm going to go through it
regime by regime on the electromagnetic
spectrum
I'm gonna start at the really high
energy end the stuff with really tiny
short wavelengths that's super energetic
so I'm talking about gamma rays x-ray
and UV we can't observe any of these
from the Earth's surface because of that
ozone layer that I mentioned before
so gamma-ray astronomy x-ray astronomy
and UV astronomy are all done from space
because we just can't see anything like
that from the ground so anything to do
with really high-energy stuff like
active galactic nuclei where you've got
supermassive black holes
accreting material and glowing really
brightly supernovae neutron stars
pulsars all of that light is blocked to
us from earth so we can't find anything
about that side of universe from Earth
Mars however there's only trace amounts
of oxygen so it's not like there's a
large amount in the upper atmosphere
that when that stuff is coming in it's
gonna get blocked by and cause that
ozone layer there is a tiny amount of
ozone on Mars this it's kind of seasonal
and how it changes with sort of all of
the movement around of air on the planet
in the atmosphere is it gets heated and
cooled down there is a known to be a
collection on the poles but it means
there is no ozone layer on Mars if
there's no ozone layer then all you're
really dependent on is the amount of air
you're then traveling through that's
what we call something called the column
density if you took a meter squared
patch on the surface of a planet and
then you looked at how much air is
actually in that sort of straight column
up you'll find that the column density
is about a hundred times less on Mars
than it is on earth so it's a lot of a
thinner atmosphere so it means there's
not even gonna be as much light blocked
on its way down either and this is why
when we've actually looked to see if we
can see gamma rays coming from
radioactive rocks on Mars the surface
we've actually been able to detect them
with satellite in orbit around Mars so
the gamma rays have actually got from
the surface of Mars through the
atmosphere to the satellite that way so
therefore we should technically be able
to get gamma rays from space down to the
surface of Mars through the atmosphere
as well to any Observatory that we build
down there in the UV though you've got
another problem you've got something
that's called
Rayleigh scattering so Rayleigh
scattering is when you have a light wave
that comes in and hits a particle
there's about a tenth of its wavelength
and then what happens is it gets
scattered away by that particle so you
have less directional light coming to
the ground instead you end up with light
scattering all the way into the
atmosphere and and out back into space
again and so the same thing happens on
Mars but the particles are obviously
different size in masses atmosphere
because it's mostly co2 and so that
really starts to hit around about a
hundred nanometer wavelength which is
like right sort of on the edge of the UV
so it means they're anything less than
that we won't actually be able to see on
Mars but between sort of like 100
nanometers and like 400 nanometers where
you're getting into the visible light
again you should be able to see UV light
from space on Mars right into the
visible wavelengths so up til
observatories on earth tend to be put in
high up dry remote places so they're
remote because it's away from light
pollution which is fine on Mars there's
no light pollution on Mars they're in
dry places because water vapor in the
atmosphere can massively affect your
observations so it can cause light
particles to scatter away and give you
sort of really fuzzy images the same way
that like when you look through a mirage
on a hot day where you've got like water
rising above a hot road everything seems
to be distorted behind it now then in
high up places not to be closer to space
or anything because you know it's like a
fractional amount of distance compared
to the distance that you're actually
observing sources out in space but
actually to look through less atmosphere
so the thinner your atmosphere the
better because there's less particles to
scatter away light or to absorb light on
its way down to you now Mars's
atmosphere is a lot thinner than ours
that's because it's not actually been
able to hold on to its atmosphere so
Mars actually doesn't have a magnetic
field so Earth's magnetic field comes
from the fact that it's got a liquid
core around its iron core and all of the
charged iron particles moving around in
this liquid iron core set up currents
which is basically electricity moving if
you have electricity moving you're gonna
set up a magnetic field the Mars core is
solid and so it doesn't actually have a
magnetic field now
might not sound like a big deal but
actually a magnetic field is kind of an
extra protective shield around a planet
so our Sun is actually very very active
and it can throw off these sort of huge
burps of very high-energy particles that
we call a solar wind now those particles
hit the Earth's magnetic field they
travel down magnetic field lines to the
poles and they make the aurora which is
beautiful site for us but Mars hasn't
got that protection with miss magnetic
fields so those solar particles very
high-energy just blast straight at its
atmosphere and so slowly over the years
that atmosphere has been stripped so
Mars is atmosphere is a lot thinner then
an atmosphere means less of it for
actually like to travel through so less
chance at being absorbed or scattered so
actually optical observations should be
better on Mars but that probably won't
be the case because of astronomers
greatest fear a dust we all know Mars is
incredibly incredibly dusty so there are
dust storms that travel all around the
planet and can actually completely block
out the Sun and that's actually recently
what's happened to the Curiosity rover
it got caught in a dust storm it's solar
batteries could never replenish
themselves it got too cold in the
Martian temperatures and unfortunately
it's electronics are no longer working
and also think about mark Watney and the
Martian dust storm hit him and he wasn't
getting enough energy from his solar
powered batteries by either so they're a
big problem on Mars so if you built an
optical observatory yes you would be
able to see things a lot better but if
you've got a dust storm hitting you
you'd be weathered out the exact same
way that you would be on earth as well
by a rainstorm
now infrared doesn't care about dust
infrared can see right through dust it's
why we use infrared as astronomers as
well is because a lot of really
interesting regions in galaxies are
hidden by a lot of dust so stars like to
form in dusty regions there tends to be
a lot of dust around the center of
galaxies as well blocking the
supermassive black hole and anything
that's going on there so if you use
infrared light we can see through that
dust which is great so we don't need to
worry about Martian dust if we were
going to build an infrared telescope
look great right but not so much because
if we go back to what happens on earth
we can break it down into the diff
and elements that cause that blocking
and you can see that actually the
majority of infrared light is blocked by
carbon outside which is the main
component of Mars atmosphere so the rest
of the infrared light on earth is
actually blocked by h2o vapor in the
atmosphere which we know we have a lot
of clouds h2o vapor etc and there's a
very specific signature in the infrared
that actually comes from methane and h2o
vapor blocks that signature from methane
and that might not sound exciting what
do we care about methane for well
actually most of the methane on earth
comes from cow farts yes I did just say
cow farts bovine in flatulence if you
want like a scientific term for it and
methane gives out a very strong
signature at very specific wavelengths
in infrared light and if say an alien
was observing planet Earth to try and
work out if there was life on planet
Earth one of the things they would look
for might be that methane signature in
the infrared but actually all the water
vapor in our atmosphere completely
blocks that signature in the infrared
now Mars has about 10,000 times less
water vapor in its atmosphere than Earth
but it's actually still enough to block
that signature from methane so really I
don't think Mars is gonna be any better
for our infrared observing than we do
already have on earth okay so now into
the radio regime and radio astronomy now
radio is trying to be kind of umbrellas
everything from the edge of the infrared
regime at the submillimetre that we call
it wavelengths through the microwave in
the radio kind of all of that is classed
as radio astronomy and if you're
wondering why do we bother even
observing the sky in radio waves well
there's a lot we can see in radio waves
again like supermassive black holes are
greeting material we can see in radio
waves
we know that the Big Bang exists because
we can observe the Cosmic Microwave
Background with radio telescopes is this
signal that we see from everywhere in
the universe that's kind of like an echo
of the Big Bang but if we can already do
that on earth why would we bother
putting them on Mars anyway the thing is
your resolution of a telescope is really
proportional to your wavelengths so the
higher the wavelength the greater the
resolution you can get
the wavelength the lower the resolution
you can get with the same sized
telescope so for radio waves you need
massive telescopes to get even the same
amount of detail you would get with a
small optical telescope the way we get
around this on earth is by building
either huge arrays of lots of antenna in
you know sort of empty spaces like
deserts where there's loads of room or
we build a dish on one side of the
planet and a dish on another side of the
planet and then we combine them so that
they make
technically one giant telescope so we
can see even smaller things we basically
make a telescope out of the entirety of
planet Earth so what we could do is we
got a lot of space on Mars there's lots
of flat areas lots of plains we could
put in a huge array of antennas to do
radio observations from Mars because
also there's not gonna be a lot of
interference on Mars either every time a
satellite goes over on earth you tend to
get radio interference or you could
build one of these dishes that you could
combine with the ones on earth so that
you haven't just got a planet sized
radio telescope you've got a solar
system sized radio telescope which would
be really really cool so yes you could
definitely build telescopes on Mars and
it would definitely be feasible to do
observations there but this atmosphere
obviously does get in the way what about
our own moon that we could build
telescopes on there and we don't even
have to worry about the fact that you've
got transmission of light through the
atmosphere there's nothing there to
absorb or scatter at all so the fact
that the moon doesn't have an atmosphere
is yes also a pro but it's also a con
because atmospheres are kind of useful
in that they burn up a lot of space
debris like asteroids as well whereas on
the moon you don't have that so any
asteroid that might hit the moon is
gonna hit the surface and could possibly
destroy a telescope we actually saw an
asteroid hit the moon last month in
January 2019 during the lunar eclipse
the Blood Moon people all around the
world at the same time on all the
livestreams spotted a bright point
source on the very edge of the moon that
turn out to be actually an asteroid
hitting the moon during eclipse and we
know that happens a lot because the moon
surface is incredibly incredibly craters
the far side of the Moon even more so
because it
Bax as like a space Hoover hoovering up
a lot of the asteroids that might be
coming towards earth with its own
gravity but at the end of the day we
have telescopes in space all of the
wavelengths of light that I've talked
about in this video that our Observatory
is now observing space in those
wavelengths and are better than anything
we can get on earth problem is obviously
that space telescopes are really
expensive now I imagine they're probably
going to be cheaper than building a
telescope on another planet however at
the minute it's difficult to get those
kind of things
funded so I think we need to stop
dreaming of Mars and sending humans to
Mars because we've already sent Rovers
and robots to Mars and they're doing a
great job so instead I think we should
be thinking about sending more
telescopes into space so they can make a
bigger difference a little bit closer to
home so I just want to give a big
shout-out to NIC heavens at Hampton
University he was a Martian atmosphere
expert who I emailed last week when I
was doing research for this video with
one simple question and he will be back
with the answers to ten more that I
didn't even think to ask which was
incredible so thank you very much - Nick
if you like this video make sure to hit
subscribe and the little Bell
notification icon because the next
notification you get from me
could be me answering one of your
questions that you posted me on Twitter
I dr. Becky with an underscore or in the
comments down below so I will look
forward to reading all of those and I
will see you next time
so let's leave the visible and head into
the invar friend in were Fred oh ma wake
up Mikey MA
so this atmosphere is made of about 70
percent nitrogen about 25 percent oxygen
is that even right I don't even know the
components of Earth's atmosphere off the
top of my head the blue light out of the
sky
sorry there's people outside why do you
have to be so conversational while I'm
trying to film stir like a moose and
then a Peter and a BAE learned it by eye
you